---
ID: 2
post_title: Introduction
author: ordinaryseeker
post_date: 2017-01-26 08:13:33
post_excerpt: ""
layout: page
permalink: http://www.theopenreligion.org/
published: true
---
We live in a magical world. Not the kind of magic we see in movies or in magic shows but a kind of magic that is almost invisible to us unless we take the effort to stop, observe and ponder. Why is there something in the universe rather than nothing? How does life form out of lifeless material? How does life acquire consciousness? What happens after death? These "Big Questions" have troubled philosophers for millennia. The answers to these “Big Questions” also have implication on our daily lives. The stories used to explain the creation of the universe and life have trickle down corollaries that affect people’s lives via deeply personal questions like, What is the purpose of my life? How should I treat myself? How should I treat others?

For atleast the past ten thousand years, since the end of the last ice age and advent of agriculture, religions have played a very important role in helping us understand the world around us and how we should live in it. Unfortunately, for most of this time, human understanding of the world was very limited. But the human mind is not satisfied unless it has answers and so stories were invented to explain everything from the creation of the universe to mundane events like thunder, tides and diseases. Over time these stories coalesced into religions and in turn these religions created rules for how people should live their lives and treat others. As society evolved in its needs and understanding, new religions were formed by borrowing stories and rules from older religions, modifying them and adding some new stories and rules to create the foundation for a new society.

Our ancestors who created these stories and rules were very wise people and we must assume that they did the best job they could with the information and situations they had on hand but the progress that humanity has made in the past 300 years in understanding the world has shaken the foundations of many of these stories. Especially in the past 100 years, this progress has been accelerating so rapidly that most of humanity has not had the “mental bandwidth” to imbibe the profound implications of these discoveries into their daily lives. On one hand we have developed ever more deadly ways to destroy each other, other life forms and the very planet that hosts us. The marriage of outdated beliefs and new technology is dangerous in a world with nuclear weapons and we cannot expect to survive our collective ignorance indefinitely. On the other hand many people, who reject the old religious rules without a full understanding of the human condition, get busy perpetually chasing fleeting pleasures and eventually become disillusioned or even depressed.

Open Religion is an attempt to distill those aspects of older religions which still hold true for the human condition but modify those aspects which have become outdated in face of modern discoveries and create new stories and rules for the new society we want to create for ourselves and for our children. A new society, in which human ingenuity is applied not towards flaming our petty enmities and egos but towards wiping out human suffering, stewarding our planet responsibly and maybe even becoming a multi-planetary species.

Older religions faced many constraints. To spread their stories and rules to a mostly uneducated population without access to modern means of communication, most older religions needed to base their authority on the divine word of an omniscient being. Hence they actively tried to prevent human updates. Open Religion is being created in a very different era where the internet has brought the means of education and communication to a majority of human population. Hence it has the luxury to acknowledge that it is a very human creation and hence has all the flaws and imperfections of its creators. It also has the luxury to include an update mechanism that can allow people from around the world to contribute their wisdom, correct its flaws and respond to new changes in human knowledge.

Being born human is in some ways like waking up with a video game controller in hand with some unknown multiplayer game playing on the screen. You watch it for some time in a confused state, learn some tricks from others to survive and thrive, be amazed by parts of it, enjoy parts of it, be hurt by parts of it but the screen goes blank long before you have figured everything out and then its “Game Over”. It would have been nice to have an owner’s manual to make sense of this experience and make it more enjoyable. Open Religion is structured to be that Owner’s Manual.

The first section introduces the highlights of the “Story so far” so that you know what is the nature of reality that you find yourself in. This section can get a bit technical but every attempt will be made to keep the language as easy as possible while still giving the insights necessary for all the following sections. Also links to references and further reading will be provided. The second section gives you recommendations on how best treat yourself, mind and body, to make the most of this experience. The third section gives you recommendations on how to treat others so that both you and they can make most of this shared experience. The final section deals with how to contribute recommendations to Open Religion, update it to keep it grounded in reality and how it should be structured to deliver on these goals.

Finally, remember that all of these are just recommendations and you are free to live however you want. Each of us was dead for billions of years and will be dead for billions of years in future with only a few decades to be alive. Enjoy this magical ride.

[maxbutton id="1" ]